The truth table we've been using as an example
describes a very useful
combinational device called a 2-to-1 multiplexer.
A multiplexer, or MUX for short, selects one
of its two input values
as the output value.
When the select input, marked with an S in
the diagram, is 0, the
value on data input D0 becomes the value of
the Y output.
When S is 1, the value of data input D1 is
selected as the Y output
value.
MUXes come in many sizes, depending on the
number of select inputs.
A MUX with K select inputs will choose between
the values of 2^K data
inputs.
For example, here's a 4-to-1 multiplexer with
4 data inputs and 2
select inputs.
Larger MUXes can be built from a tree of 2-to-1
MUXes, as shown here.
Why are MUXes interesting?
One answer is that they provide a very elegant
and general way of
implementing a logic function.
Consider the 8-to-1 MUX shown on the right.
The 3 inputs — A, B, and CIN — are used
as the three select signals
for the MUX.
Think of the three inputs as forming a 3-bit
binary number.
For example, when they're all 0, the MUX will
select data input 0, and
when they're all 1, the MUX will select data
input 7, and so on.
How does make it easy to implement the logic
function shown in the
truth table?
Well, we'll wire up the data inputs of the
MUX to the constant values
shown in the output column in the truth table.
The values on the A, B and CIN inputs will
cause the MUX to select the
appropriate constant on the data inputs as
the value for the COUT output.
If later on we change the truth table, we
don't have to redesign some
complicated sum-of-products circuit, we simply
have to change the
constants on the data inputs.
Think of the MUX as a table-lookup device
that can be reprogrammed to
implement, in this case, any three-input equation.
This sort of circuit can be used to create
various forms of
programmable logic, where the functionality
of the integrated circuit
isn't determined at the time of manufacture,
but is set during a
programming step performed by the user at
some later time.
Modern programmable logic circuits can be
programmed to replace
millions of logic gates.
Very handy for prototyping digital systems
before committing to the
expense of a custom integrated circuit implementation.
So MUXes with N select lines are effectively
stand-ins for N-input
logic circuits.
Such a MUX would have 2^N data inputs.
They're useful for N up to 5 or 6, but for
functions with more inputs,
the exponential growth in circuit size makes
them impractical.
Not surprisingly, MUXes are universal as shown
by these MUX-based
implementations for the sum-of-products building
blocks.
There is some speculation that in molecular-scale
logic technologies,
MUXes may be the natural gate, so it's good
to know they can be used
to implement any logic function.
Even XOR is simple to implement using only
2-to-1 MUXes!